---
id: languagespython
title: Python
description: This document describes the Python module packaging guidelines for openRuyi.
slug: /guide/packaging-guidelines/languages/Python
---

# Python Packaging Guidelines

This document describes the Python module packaging guidelines for openRuyi.

## Naming

Packages for Python libraries must use the `python-` prefix.

For the package name (`DISTNAME`), use the name the upstream project uses on PyPI. You must add the following macro at the top of the spec file:

```specfile
%global srcname DISTNAME
```

In short, the `srcname` macro represents the project’s name on PyPI.

## Source URL

Whenever possible, you should use the source archive published by the upstream project on PyPI as the source URL, except for packages that do not provide source archives on PyPI or are otherwise unavailable there. For example, `python-pyperclip`:

```specfile
%global srcname pyperclip

Source0:        https://files.pythonhosted.org/packages/source/p/%{srcname}/%{srcname}-%{version}.tar.gz
```

If the package name (`DISTNAME`) differs from the name used in the download URL, you should define the `pypi_name` macro at the top of the spec file. For example, `python-aiohttp-socks`:

```specfile
%global srcname aiohttp-socks
%global pypi_name aiohttp_socks

Source0:        https://files.pythonhosted.org/packages/source/a/%{pypi_name}/%{pypi_name}-%{version}.tar.gz
```

:::warning Warning

The `pypi_name` macro specifies the filename of **the project’s downloadable source archive on PyPI**; It does **not** represent **the actual project name on PyPI**. For that purpose, you should use the `srcname` macro.

:::

Another example is `python-pytest-rerunfailures`:

```specfile
%global srcname pytest-rerunfailures
%global pypi_name pytest_rerunfailures

Source0:        https://files.pythonhosted.org/packages/source/p/%{srcname}/%{pypi_name}-%{version}.tar.gz
```

the `pypi_name` macro specifies the filename of the project’s downloadable source archive on PyPI.

## Dependencies

Packages should not declare an explicit runtime dependency on `python3`, because the following dependencies are added automatically in the corresponding cases:

* When you install files into `%{python3_sitelib}` or `%{python3_sitearch}`, the build system automatically generates a dependency on `python(abi) = 3.X`.

* If the package contains executable Python scripts, the build system automatically generates a dependency on `/usr/bin/python3`.

### BuildRequires: pkgconfig(python3)

Every package that uses Python and/or installs Python modules must include `BuildRequires: pkgconfig(python3)` in the spec file, even if the build process does not explicitly invoke Python.

### Provides: python3-DISTNAME

Since openRuyi does not split `python3` into a separate subpackage, but instead provides it directly from the main package, if the package is architecture-independent, you should add the following entries to the spec file:

```specfile
Provides:       python3-DISTNAME = %{version}-%{release}
%python_provide python3-DISTNAME
```

If the package is architecture-dependent, you should add the following entries to the spec file instead:

```specfile
Provides:       python3-%{srcname} = %{version}-%{release}
Provides:       python3-%{srcname}%{?_isa} = %{version}-%{release}
%python_provide python3-%{srcname}
```

Here, you can replace `DISTNAME` with the previously defined macro, which is typically `%{srcname}`.

## RPM Macros for Python Modules

This section lists several commonly used RPM macros for packaging Python modules.

### Build Macros

#### %pyproject_buildrequires

Use this macro in the `%generate_buildrequires` section of the spec file to generate the package's `BuildRequires`.

#### %pyproject_wheel

Use this macro to build the package. In most cases, it is the only macro you need in the `%build` section. It requires the `BuildRequires` generated by `%pyproject_buildrequires`.

#### %pyproject_install

Use this macro to install packages built by `%pyproject_wheel` builds. It also requires the `BuildRequires` generated by `%pyproject_buildrequires`.

#### %pyproject_save_files

Use this macro to generate the file list corresponding to the specified importable modules and save it as `%{pyproject_files}`. The generated list does not include README files. If the package metadata declares license files, the list includes them.

#### %pyproject_check_import

Use this macro to read the list of importable Python modules generated by `%pyproject_save_files`. Maintainers can use it as a smoke test to quickly detect issues such as missing runtime dependencies, incorrect installation paths, or failures when loading extension modules.

#### %pyproject_files

This macro expands to the path of the file list written by `%pyproject_save_files`. Example usage:

```specfile
%files -n python-DISTNAME -f %{pyproject_files}
```
